In times where e-government and societal digitalization are launched on a large scale the Automatic Land Registration System in Denmark will serve as a good illustration of what software development and management is about. The system was delivered a year late and when it was delivered it slowed down the processing of land registration to such an extend that it became a major cost to land owners. The software system was financed by an approval in December 2006 in the Danish Parliament’s Finance Committee. The expected duration of the development was 16 months with a cost of 430 million DKK. The reported duration was 34 months (112% over budget) and now with a cost of 540 million DKK (25% over budget). 	A land owner feeling a victim of the system says: “For my husband and I the problems with the land registration has meant that from the time when we sold our apartment in August 2009 and until February 2010 we have had an additional cost of 7000 DKK per months”, she claims . 1 The Association of Danish Law Firms stated that: “The number of errors has been 2 numerous to an extent where we do not any longer trust the provided guarantee that the automatic land registration would work faultless by end of December”. The software company, CSC, on the other hand stated that: “The system performs 3 as it is supposed to, but there will always be functions that should be redone and be fine tuned”, says Fritjof Lund the director of e-government systems at CSC. In a report in August 2010 by Rigsrevisionen (the Danish national audit office) on the Land Registration System requested by The Parliament’s Public Accounts Committee it is concluded that there are many causes (the executive summary is 8 pages). An ambitious costsaving strategy where 200 jobs are saved in the Land Registration Court, a big-bang strategy was selected for the organisational implementation and the court was geographically. A SYSTEM GONE SOUR 1 centralised in a single court in Hobro to cover the whole country all led to a high-risk project. Many risks occurred when the software company CSC delivered too late and with less than expected functionality or even errors. Despite the risk assessment there were too little or ineffective risk mitigation in place. If we look upon this case from the viewpoint of the software vendor, CSC, a different picture portrays the situation. CSC has in June 2010 announced that the Danish Land 4 Registration System was awarded the Chairman’s Award. CSC has with this system undoubtedly solved a very difficult task where the complexity in automating a set of legal procedures and the necessary records is very high. From the company’s standpoint they delivered the system late, but that was almost to be expect due to the complexity of the automation. The delivered system also had some minor errors and again that is to be expected when facing such complexity, according to CSC. The case proves (again) that solutions to social and human challenges are much more than the technical parts—in this case the software, the servers and other hardware. It may well be that the system is technically fine, but if a case blows up like this it is not good for CSC, for the court, the parliament, the government, and certainly not for the land owners who have lost money on the system when it turned sour. The implication is that software company cannot possibly pretend that their task is one-dimensionally to only development and manage the technical parts. Software developers and managers collaborate with managers and users at the client organisation and are easily as responsible as their clients for how effective the collaboration is. The case also proves (again) that such a case can be and should be seen through many perspectives. In legal terms the coming years will show through court cases who will pay the bill(s). In engineering terms the system is now partly working and that is a lot better than what one would fear. From the Land Registration Court’s perspective they have desperately been trying to reduce the backlog of registration cases and don’t need more attention. It has surely been no fun to answer the phone at the court when frustrated land owners were calling. The government needs e-government project that are not creating headlines in the public as well as the trade press. This is in particular the case because ministries have been trying in vain to address the troubles of e-government projects for several years. Where does that leave the software companies? Right in the middle! Face the music
